There are various pros and cons between a fully decentralized token system (ERC-20) and a centralized Digital Dollar system: 

A Digital Dollar system refers to a system controlled by a single, centralized entity or group of entities. This is a digital currency that enables users to transact as they would with cash and record it in a record-able way on the blockchain. The problem with the centralization of the currency is that entries on this ledger can be deleted or edited by bad actors. Centralized entities can also limit or restrict certain parties from accessing or interacting with currencies if their interests differ from those who control the currency via a whitelist and social score system. This is unfair and it is my hope that this will not be implemented.  

The ERC-20 decentralized token system adds increased transparency and security through a distributed ledger system. Transactions in this system are transparent and are verified by thousands of anonymous actors around the world through consensus mechanisms. If a certain threshold of nodes are able to come to the same consensus and agree on a group of transactions, these transactions are verified. In order for a bad actor to manipulate or control transactions they would need to have control of 51% of the nodes connected to the network. This added security is a massive added benefit to a decentralized system, but the system lacks in being able to reverse accidental transactions via the blockchain as would be possible in a Digital Dollar system.
