Consensus: The method by which computers connected to a blockchain enabled network validate transactions and create, record and store blocks. 
Blockchain Trilemma: The relationship between compromises of Decentralization, Security and Scalability in blockchains and their approach to consensus
Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance or Byzantine Agreement
Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance (pBFT) refers to the algorithm deployed on the majority of blockchain networks that prevents bad actors (malicious nodes) from making changes to records stored in the distributed database. This is the foundation on which many of the following consensus mechanism are built upon. pBFT gets its name from the Byzantine Problem which refers to medieval army general leading troops into battle. If all of the troops are loyal to the cause, the campaign is considered successful. If a significant enough amount if troops are traitors, the campaign fails. This same principle is applied to nodes on distributed computing networks. 

Proof of Work
Proof of Work (PoW) is a consensus mechanism that utilizes a network of powerful connected computing nodes or “miners” who work to solve cryptographic puzzles for the chance to be the first node to find the solution and be rewarded for validation of the current block and creation of the next. The cryptographic puzzles utilized by PoW are known as hash functions and they are used to compress a set of data into a specified length or file size. PoW sacrifices its speed in favor of an extremely secure and decentralized network. Its shortcomings are apparent in its energy use with an extreme amount of power being drawn by each of the many nodes that are mining blocks. PoW also creates an enormous amount of E-waste with the necessary components being used until they “burn out” or can’t be used again. Examples of PoW blockchains include Bitcoin, Litecoin and Monero. 

Proof of Stake 
Proof of Stake (PoS) is designed to create consensus through a distributed transaction database and a fleet of validator nodes. Validator nodes are computers capable of processing transactions executed on the blockchain. Validators require tokens to be “staked” or locked up during the time that the computer is validating transactions. In exchange for helping to secure the network, validators are rewarded a percentage of network transaction fees. The Proof of Stake system is designed to be a more energy efficient and eco-friendly alternative to more computer-resource intensive consensus mechanisms. PoS compromises some of its security and decentralization (due to its lower number of nodes) in favor of enhancements in speed and reduced power consumption. Examples of Proof of Stake blockchains include Solana, Ethereum 2.0 and Algorand. 

Proof of Delegated Stake 
Proof of Delegated Stake (DPoS) is a consensus mechanism in which users of a network elect trusted parties or delegates to validate transactions. Validators are elected by users staking the native token of the protocol to act as a vote. If the delegate successfully validates the block, all participants of that pool are rewarded. Typically, there is a finite number of delegates allowed to participate at a given time and there is usually a high total value locked (TVL) associated with a pool. Like PoS, DPos sacrifices decentralization in favor of network speed and scalability. DPoS finds advantages over PoS in its enhanced network security due to users voting on which actors they favor on the network. Examples of DPoS networks include EOS.

Proof of Space 
Proof of Space (PoSP) is a consensus mechanism by which users intending to validate transactions can prove that they have reserved a finite and specific amount of hard disk space. The files that comprise the storage used are generated from the labeling of a hard-to-pebble graph. Through this user can successfully verify that they had sufficient hard disk space available, and the block is validated. This has been successfully implemented on blockchains such as Chia, Storj and Filecoin. PoSP is known as one of the most eco-friendly methods to create consensus due to its extremely low processing power, with its one caveat being that it creates similar E-waste to that of PoW. It approaches the blockchain trifecta by sacrificing a some of its security for extreme levels of scalability and decentralization, as almost any internet enabled device can support a proof of space system to some capacity. 

Proof of Capacity
Proof of Captivity (PoC) is a subset of PoSP in which miners calculate or “plot” hash functions like PoW mining. The network then chooses one of these plots at random to complete block validation. Proof of captivity experiences the same constraints as PoSP in regard to E-waste and slightly lower network security. An example of PoC is Signum. 

Proof of Elapsed Time 
Proof of Elapsed Time (PoET) is a consensus mechanism often utilized in permissioned blockchains. PoET uses a lottery system to decide which node has won a block while ensuring each node has an equal chance to win the block reward. This is achieved by generating a random sleep time for the nodes to be taken offline for until the node with the shortest wait wakes up and wins the block reward. This system has high levels of decentralization but lacks the security and speed necessary to support a public permissionless blockchain. The best known example of PoET is Hyperledger Sawtooth.

Proof of Authority 
Proof of Authority (PoA) is a consensus mechanism in which validating users provide their real-world identity to verify transactions on the blockchain. This effectively replaces the coins necessary to stake a validator with a real-world stake of the users reputation. This system uses a small number of validating parties as well to reduce probability of bad actors having control of validation. PoA sacrifices much of its decentralization for very high levels of security and speed due to a low computational load and network speed requirement to deploy the system. Real-world examples include VeChain. 

Proof of Identity
Proof of Identity (PoID) is a consensus mechanism in which all users of a network prove that they are both a human being and more specifically, are the person who they say they are. In doing so, the blockchain manually verifies the identity of all users and pays out an equal share of the block reward to all users deemed to be associated with their biological identity. This is often accomplished through use of biometric technologies. This system comprises much of the embedded security of a blockchain as its underlying ID verification technology is vulnerable to attacks from bad actors, in favor of a very high level of decentralization and speed due to the large number of connected nodes on the network. PoID is also extremely energy efficient. Examples of PoID networks are still in development as have not yet been successfully implemented. 

Proof of Activity 
Proof of Activity (PoAC) is a consensus mechanism that combines features from PoW and PoS blockchains to create a hybrid consensus model. Proof of Activity leverages PoW mining as a way of creating new blocks on the network. After a block is mined, consensus is reached through validators operating a PoS system. This protects the system from a 51% attack in both the block creation and validation layers of the network. This system compromises some of its speed to ensure that blocks are created as securely as possible and as decentralized as possible while maintaining the energy-efficiency and quick-transact elements present on PoS networks. An example of successful implementation of PoAC is on Decred.  

References
Academy, Binance. “Proof of Authority Explained | Binance Academy.” Binance Academy, Binance Academy, 8 Dec. 2018, https://academy.binance.com/en/articles/proof-of-authority-explained.
BeckyMH. “Proof-of-Space - BitcoinWiki.” BitcoinWiki - All About Cryptocurrency, BitcoinWiki, 18 Dec. 2017, https://en.bitcoinwiki.org/wiki/Proof-of-space.
Contributors to Wikimedia projects. “Proof of Identity (Blockchain Consensus) - Wikipedia.” Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia, Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., 4 Oct. 2021, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proof_of_identity_(blockchain_consensus).
Frankenfield, Jake. “Proof of Elapsed Time (PoET) Definition.” Investopedia, Investopedia, 4 Apr. 2018, https://www.investopedia.com/terms/p/proof-elapsed-time-cryptocurrency.asp.
---. “Proof of Work (PoW) Definition.” Investopedia, Investopedia, 15 Sept. 2016, https://www.investopedia.com/terms/p/proof-work.asp.
---. “Proof-of-Stake (PoS) Definition.” Investopedia, Investopedia, 3 May 2017, https://www.investopedia.com/terms/p/proof-stake-pos.asp.
Seth, Shobhit. “Proof of Activity Definition.” Investopedia, Investopedia, 4 Apr. 2018, https://www.investopedia.com/terms/p/proof-activity-cryptocurrency.asp.
Techopedia. “What Is Delegated Proof of Stake (DPoS)? - Definition from Techopedia.” Techopedia.Com, Techopedia, 2 Jan. 2019, https://www.techopedia.com/definition/33597/delegated-proof-of-stake-dpos.
“What Is Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance? Complete Beginner’s Guide.” Blockonomi, http://facebook.com/blockonomi, 18 Apr. 2020, https://blockonomi.com/practical-byzantine-fault-tolerance/.
